post about better code without effort without AI (#1202)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2025-12-15-better-code/index.Rmd

---

> title: Better Code, Without Any Effort, Without Even AI

Reviewer: I feel like all the information is in the post but I'm not a big fan of its structure. When I arrive at the lintr section, I have code that is automatically fixed and formatted so it's not clear to me (trying to be an objective reader who doesn't know linting and formatting tools in R) what the added value of lintr would be, despite the few remaining warnings.

The following structure would make more sense to me:

- run lintr first on the dirty code, we see plenty of warnings about formatting and linting
  - you can explain a few of them
  - nice to have those warnings, but now we need to fix them
- how do we fix formatting? with Air -> highlight caveat: conflicting rules between Air and lintr
- how do we fix lints? with Jarl  -> highlight caveat: Jarl doesn't have all rules of lintr for now (e.g. unreachable_code_linter)
- want to refactor further? use flir with custom rules (and don't highlight the linting capabilities since you presented Jarl earlier)
- finally, you could mention IDE integration in the "how to use tools". Air is great to use in the CLI but even better with "format on save". Similar stuff for highlighting lints with Jarl. 

and then all the rest about AI and conclusion.

### Improve with the new jarl CLI! :computer:$

In the terminal:

```sh
jarl check test.R --fix
```

```{r, echo=FALSE}
a <- system2("jarl", c("check", "test.R", "--fix", "--allow-dirty"))
```

```{r, file="test.R", eval=FALSE, echo=TRUE}
```

`any(is.na(x))` was automatically replaced with `anyNA(x)`!

The jarl CLI is as fast as Air is for styling.
Furthermore, because it is a simple binary that does not need R to run, it's quicker to install on continuous integration.

Nevertheless, since jarl is newer than lintr, it supports fewer rules for now.

### Improve with the {flir} :package:

You could complement the usage of lintr, Air and jarl with flir which is better at [*custom rules*](https://flir.etiennebacher.com/articles/adding_rules).
For instance, what if you'd prefer your codebase to use `rlang::abort()` instead of `stop()`?

We first run

```r
flir::setup_flir(getwd())
```

We save the file below under `flir/rules/custom/stop_abort.yml`.

```yaml
id: stop_abort-1
language: r
severity: warning
rule:
  pattern: stop($$$ELEMS)
fix: rlang::abort(paste0(~~ELEMS~~))
message: Use `rlang::abort()` instead of `stop()`.
```
We then run

```{r, echo=TRUE,eval=TRUE}

> flir::fix("test.R", linters = "flir/rules/custom/stop_abort.yml")

Author: weirdly, no, it didn't work

- styling: space around infix operators for instance; implicit integer.
- performance: `anyNA(x)` is better than `any(is.na(x))`.

Since lintr has been around for a long time, it has an impressive collection of rules, the "linters".
Even reading their documentation can teach you a lot, especially as the [list](https://lintr.r-lib.org/reference/index.html#individual-linters) grows over time!

Now, based on these alerts, how could we improve the code? 

### Format with Air :computer:$
Air is software which automatically formats your R code according to a set of rules.

In the terminal:

```sh
air format test.R
```
 And this returns:
```{r, echo=FALSE}
a <- system2("air", c("format", "test.R"))
```

```{r, file="test.R", eval=FALSE, echo=TRUE}
```

Now, the spacing in the code is regular!
The `if` condition is furthermore formatted on three lines instead of only one.
Overall, the code is easier to read because it now follows popular conventions.

Note that lintr and Air might have conflicting advice on styling: you can [deactivate lintr's styling](https://lintr.r-lib.org/articles/lintr.html#the--lintr-file) related rules if you use Air.

### Improve with the new jarl CLI! :computer:$

> Similar to Air, jarl formats your code, and like lintr, identifies potential problems, but unlike lintr, jarl also applies fixes!

Reviewer: Jarl is not a formatter, the previous formulation (that I think I suggested) was to explain that Air is fast for formatting and Jarl is fast for linting / fixing.

Author: But thank you!!

---
title: Better Code, Without Any Effort, Without Even AI
author: 
- Maëlle Salmon
editor:
- Etienne Bacher
date: '2025-12-15'
slug: better-code
description: Useful local, free, deterministic tools to improve your code
output: hugodown::md_document
tags:
  - best practice
  - tech notes
params:
  doi: "10.59350/98899-51c03"
---

We are experiencing a programming revolution, with the democratization of artificial intelligence... 

> But also with the creation and improvement of more old-school tools to improve your code: local, free, deterministic. 

Reviewer 2: I don't think software is 'old-school', just yet 😁, but perhaps that's just me!

Let's start with a script containing a few problems...
Can you spot them?

```{r, file="test.R", eval=FALSE, echo=TRUE}
```

### The R console vs the terminal

Note that in this post, some tools are used in the R console, but others are used in the terminal, that you might also know as command line or [shell](https://12days.cmdchallenge.com/#/12days_2).

### Learn what to improve with {lintr} :package:

A first instinct might be to run the lintr package on the script.
The `lint()` function performs static analysis.

```{r, echo=TRUE,eval=FALSE}
lintr::lint("test.R", linters = lintr::all_linters())
```
```{r, echo=FALSE,eval=TRUE}
lintr::lint_dir(pattern = "(?i)[.]r", linters = lintr::all_linters())
```

We therefore get alerts about

- styling: space around infix operators for instance; implicit integer.
- performance: `anyNA(x)` is better than `any(is.na(x))`.

Since lintr has been around for a long time, it has an impressive collection of rules, the "linters".
Even reading their documentation can teach you a lot, especially as the [list](https://lintr.r-lib.org/reference/index.html#individual-linters) grows over time!

Now, based on these alerts, how could we improve the code? 

> ### Format with Air :computer:$

Reviewer 2: is the '$' here for a reason?

> ### Format with Air :computer:$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Format with Air :computer:$
Air is software which automatically formats your R code according to a set of rules.
```

In the terminal:

```sh
air format test.R
```

```{r, echo=FALSE}
a <- system2("air", c("format", "test.R"))
```

```{r, file="test.R", eval=FALSE, echo=TRUE}
```

Now, the spacing in the code is regular!
The `if` condition is furthermore formatted on three lines instead of only one.
Overall, the code is easier to read because it now follows popular conventions.

Note that lintr and Air might have conflicting advice on styling: you can [deactivate lintr's styling](https://lintr.r-lib.org/articles/lintr.html#the--lintr-file) related rules if you use Air.

> ### Improve with the new jarl CLI! :computer:$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Improve with the new jarl CLI! :computer:$
Similar to Air, jarl formats your code, and like lintr, identifies potential problems, but unlike lintr, jarl also applies fixes!
```

In the terminal:

```sh
jarl check test.R --fix
```

```{r, echo=FALSE}
a <- system2("jarl", c("check", "test.R", "--fix", "--allow-dirty"))
```

```{r, file="test.R", eval=FALSE, echo=TRUE}
```

`any(is.na(x))` was automatically replaced with `anyNA(x)`!

The jarl CLI is as fast for checking and fixing lints as Air is for styling.
Furthermore, because it is a simple binary that does not need R to run, it's quicker to install on continuous integration.

> Nevertheless, since jarl is newer than lintr, it supports fewer rules for now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, since jarl is newer than lintr, it supports fewer rules for now.
```

```r
flir::setup_flir(getwd())
```

We save the file below under `flir/rules/custom/stop_abort.yml`.

```yaml
id: stop_abort-1
language: r
severity: warning
rule:
  pattern: stop($$$ELEMS)
fix: rlang::abort(paste0(~~ELEMS~~))
message: Use `rlang::abort()` instead of `stop()`.
```
We then run

```{r, echo=TRUE,eval=TRUE}
flir::fix("test.R", linters = "flir/rules/custom/stop_abort.yml")
```

```{r, file="test.R", eval=FALSE, echo=TRUE}
```

The call to `stop()` was automatically replaced.
Now, we might want to then manually remove the useless `paste0()`, but we're already closer to an ideal script.

```{r}
#| echo: false
a <- file.remove("test.R")
```

## Tooling

The tools we used are:

- :package: [{lintr}](https://lintr.r-lib.org/): R package to get informed of many code patterns, by [Michael Chirico and many others](https://lintr.r-lib.org/authors.html).
- :computer:$ [Air](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/): CLI to format code, by Lionel Henry and Davis Vaughan.
- :computer:$ [jarl](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/): CLI to fix code patterns, by Etienne Bacher.
- :package: [{flir}](https://flir.etiennebacher.com/): R package to fix custom code patterns, by Etienne Bacher.

> ## How to use those tools

Reviewer 2: I feel like the previous section already explained how to use them, and this section is more about workflow.

```suggestion
## Integrating these tools into your workflow
```

You could use those tools locally on your machine from time to time.
For instance, when inheriting an older project, I will first renovate it using them.
Locally, a real game changer is using the integration of your IDE with the tools.
For instance, I have Positron set up so that [Air](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/editors.html) is run on my scripts when I save them.

> The jarl CLI also provides [integrations with editors](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/editors).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Locally, you can use those tools as needed.
For instance, when inheriting an older project, the first thing I do is renovate the project by applying these tools.
A real game changer is using the integration of these tools with your IDE.
For instance, I have Positron set up so that [Air](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/editors.html) runs on my scripts when I save them.
The jarl CLI also provides [integrations with IDEs](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/editors).
```

You could also use those tools on continuous integration.
For instance, a workflow might [suggest formatting changes in Pull Requests](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/integration-github-actions.html#format-with-github-suggestions).
The use of suggestions rather than a direct commit means the contributor get a chance to learn about the improvements.

Whether to ask flir and jarl to do changes as opposed to _alerting_ you about them depends on the context.
You might learn more by doing the changes yourself.
In any case, having a proper look at modifications before committing them is crucial!

## What about artificial intelligence?

> Sure, artificial intelligence can be handy but...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Artificial intelligence can be handy but...
```

- The best LLMs are not local;

> - They cost money;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- They cost money and are slower;
```

- They are not deterministic so might miss a rule whereas the tools in this post don't;

> - Their usage entail some ideological and ethical problems that we won't list here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Their usage may entail some ideological and ethical problems which can be unattractive.
```
